(upbeat music)
- Hi everyone, welcome to this week's episode
of No Such Things Official, where we were trying
to buy the brilliant Daniel Sloss.
Now, anyone who's really into that comedy
will definitely know Daniel.
He is a Scottish comedian,
but he basically tours all the way around the world
and really is one of the biggest stand-up names
in the entire world right now.
We were absolutely thrilled that he came on the show
and we had such a great time.
I really hope you enjoyed this show,
which I'm certain you will.
He has a little bit of a hidden in a geek to him,
which I know you'll definitely enjoy.
But if you want to know more about him,
then the best thing to do is to go to
Danielsloss.com, that's D-A-N-I-E-L-S-L-O-S-S.
And if you go to that website,
you will see that he is about to go on tour,
and basically it would be easier for me to say
the place is where he's not gonna be,
because he's gonna be all over the UK.
He'll be in New Zealand, in Australia,
in America, in Europe, all sorts of places all over the world.
And at the end of the year, on November the 28th,
he is coming back to London and doing the Wembley Arena.
Oh my gosh, I have just been there to a gig.
That is a big, big venue, but I'm sure he will do it just this
'cause he is a brilliant, brilliant comedian,
which you're about to find out on this show.
So, really hope you enjoy it.
Quick reminder, do go to patreon.com
if you'd like to learn more about Club Fish,
which is where you can get loads and loads of extras from us.
I won't go into it again.
Listen to all the episodes.
We talk about it every week.
But no, there is some really cool stuff on there.
So do go to patreon.com/clubfish if you fancy that.
But if not, then please enjoy this week's show.
We're the amazing, Daniel Sloss.
On with the podcast.
(upbeat music)
Hello and welcome to another episode of no such thing as a fish,
a weekly podcast coming to you from the QI offices in Hobern.
My name is Dan Triber.
I'm sitting here with Andrew Hunter Murray, James Harkin,
and Daniel Sloss.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones
with our four favorite facts from the last seven days
and in a particular order, here we go.
Starting with fact number one, and that is Dan.
The first known written reference about Scotland comes from Rome
and it said, "Don't go there, it's awful."
Right.
And even if you were to turn over a bunch of evidence right now
that says that this statement is not true,
it is still true.
It's too plausible to not do the case.
I think it's though compared to Rome's really nice, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
Sunny.
Yeah.
I mean, sometimes sunny in Scotland.
Sometimes.
I mean, now it's getting better.
We're the only country that's really enjoying global warming.
Like it.
So do you know who it was who said this?
No.
I don't.
But I know this idea that the Romans never conquered Scotland.
And that's where the Scots like to pitch it.
Right.
It's that the Romans, they went through Goll, they went through England,
they did all that.
They got to Scotland and we were just too savage and too brutal.
Right.
They couldn't be bothered to conquer the last 600 miles.
Yeah.
There are a few ancient descriptions of Britain which really make
clear how peripheral Britain was.
The whole, the whole, every nation and every tribe in every island of Britain
was completely extraneous to world affairs.
It just wasn't a thing.
And so Cassius Dio, ancient writer, this is just the description of those who live on the
two sides of a big wall.
So there's the Caledonians, which is old name for the Hura, Scottish.
And the Maïtai, I don't know how that's pronounced.
Maïtai.
That's sort of MMA.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
All of it's delicious.
All of it fruit.
Oh, yes.
That's the Maïtai.
So the Maïtai's all carry around little umbrellas and sparklers.
That sounds like the English to me.
Yes, that's a fair accurate description.
So the Maïtai live south of the wall which devised the island and the Caledonians on the
other side.
Neither of these groups of people has learned how to make a wall.
They possess neither walls, cities, nor tilled fields, but they live on their flocks, wild
game and certain fruits.
They dwell in tents, possess their women in common.
And they can.
Very liberal.
Yeah.
I mean, see if you think it applies to anyone in the 21st century, they can endure hunger
and cold.
Jordy's.
It's got a Jordy's.
Yeah, Jordy's.
They can endure.
Okay.
Okay, hold that thought.
They can endure hunger and cold and any kind of hardship for they plunge into the swamps
and there exist for many days with only their heads above water.
Why?
Apparently, yeah, the thing.
Yeah.
I can't picture my ancestors.
Just like up to their necks in a board.
Just because like that's the only place you can safely fart.
Stinks in here.
Yeah, it does.
We're in a box.
Why would it not stink in here?
But I think one of the main things is that Scotland and Britain more generally were on
the edge of the empire.
Yes.
And so they used it as like a counterpoint to their civilization.
So anything that they thought was civilized, they said that the barbarians living up north
were doing.
Yeah.
And they were different than us.
And I'm sure you will all create me wrong here.
The barbarian, I learned this in classical studies, came from, Barbar is what they thought
we sounded like when we spoke.
That was there.
Me, me, me.
It was Barbar Barbar.
Barbar Barbar.
I think that's right.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
Right.
You were on an England.
Don't I do you?
I'm just.
How do you feel?
This is not what we came on the podcast of fact check.
I.
We're not fact checking my history.
We're fact checking Roman history.
That I was supposed to fucking dare you.
I'm so surprised when you put the accent on it.
As soon as the mics came on.
The accent came on.
I've got a lovely tumbridge well.
Can this table be flipped?
Where are we?
Whereabouts?
Where's your secret sign?
Oh, got right.
So through no fault of my own, my parents, the horse, they met at Edinburgh University where
they fell in love.
Yeah.
North of the wall.
Right.
And then they moved to London.
And they accidentally conceived me, and they will deny to this day that it was an accidental
conception.
But if you gave them to tell you the story about when I was conceived, they were unemployed
living on a houseboat under Thames.
So either I was unintentional, or I was intentional, and they suck.
It sounded interesting because my main concern is whether you're from south of the river or
not.
And actually you've outplayed me by being on the river before.
I don't know what class you are.
I can't judge you.
Kingston upon Thames and then my dad's from the North of Scotland.
My mom's from East Kilbride.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So it's so classical.
Working class, Scots for generations and generations.
Yeah.
And then you, the English.
And then me, the...
Dan, I'm going to fucking live.
It's still hot.
Right.
Do you guys want a quiz?
Yes.
Yes, please.
Here we go.
Who said this about the people of Britain?
Was it an ancient world writer or was it The New York Times in 2020?
Okay.
How many questions in this quiz?
Four.
Great.
Okay.
And he usually hits us with a one question quiz.
Just a question.
Yeah.
The sky is gloomy with many clouds.
I've rephrased these a little bit.
Yeah, yeah.
But if they were in the original Latin, it would be a bit of a giveaway, wouldn't it?
The sky is gloomy with many clouds and showers are frequent.
That seems to team.
Now, I feel like that's going to be a warm in general.
I feel like that's an old, old tummy.
I'll take the NYT then.
Okay.
I'll go old, Timmy.
It's Tassitus.
A hundred AD.
Right.
They covalued by the hundreds in swamps.
Oh, no.
Now, Scotland did just qualify for the World Cup for the first time since 1998.
Uh-huh.
I'm going New York Times with one.
Yes.
It's hard not to.
You're all right.
It's The New York Times in 2020.
No.
Yes.
It's it.
They wrote a piece about a heat wave where they said the people have been taking to
the swamps and what they meant was hackney marshes.
Not in Scotland, though.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no
I'm afraid the food in the capital is principally porridge and boiled mutton
but the food is salo and predictable neuro time.
It's telling us a new old time.
Yeah.
2020 porridge boiled mutton was apparently the core of the British food scene until quite recently.
That's four out of four for everyone I think.
Yeah.
Dan, do you own an island in Scotland by any chance?
Do I own one?
Yeah, because I was doing some googling about islands generally
because one of the initial facts Dan that you sent us was about the fact that there's a
bunch of wallabies that are roaming wild on a little island.
The only population of wild wallabies in Scotland is on an island called Incanaquin.
Yeah.
And you know who owns that island?
I do not.
coasty young of desert island discs.
She bought her own island.
And her own desert island.
It's her own desert island.
And she's just wallabies to it.
If they were ready to luxury it.
Fleetwears to Shakespeare and a load of wallabies.
She inherited.
She inherited the wallabies that are already there.
Very exciting.
Do we know how they got there in the first place?
Yes.
So, I can't remember what it was.
But there was like a Scottish and Mr. Claire Lady went to Australia fell in love with these wallabies.
No matter what the locals told her that they were just firemen.
She was like, I'll take a moment.
I'll domesticate them.
No.
Then back to Scotland very quickly realized that they were just firemen.
Didn't have it in her heart to kill them.
So she was like, she's got like her butler or a man so from wherever.
They were to like canoe them over to this tiny little bit of a log.
Where they've been for like 60 years now for generations.
And because they've got no natural predators.
You can rent a canoe in a kayak.
My friends have done it.
Go to the islands.
And wallabies will just come up to you and hang out with you.
And if you can't there, they'll sew.
So round your fire because they've never been eaten.
Lamb island.
Have you heard of Lamb island?
Yeah.
I have not.
Okay.
Well, that in 2009 that was bought by Yuri Geller.
It's now bent completely into such a thing.
He thinks that there's something mystical about it.
That there used to be witch trials.
And there's also a crystal orb that once belonged to Albert Einstein buried on the island.
These are all the claims.
But it's become a bit of a tourist attraction.
So people who rent out boats will do tours around the island of this mystical island.
But they're going, they're going cheap.
You know, if you've got islands.
Yeah, if you've got money in that territory.
Yeah, but with rising, see what I mean, you know, it's a false economy.
If you're buying an island, just see levels of rising.
I think legs are usually okay.
I reckon.
And I think Scotland is rising in general.
I mean, because of, yes, because of the ice sheet receding at the end of the last ice age.
And I think Scotland is still bouncing back.
On the islands, they have these incredible beaches in Scotland, right?
Whereas if you go to Dover, you have big old cliffs.
Because the entire country is on a slight slant.
But that's because Scottish people are fat.
So if you look at methane, then it's bringing up the, it's bringing up England night.
And we can't have always wondered about that.
Yeah, yeah.
We should, we should embrace it.
Because there's less people in Scotland than there are in London.
It really goes to show just how much we love chocolate.
This podcast does not agree with that.
I'm from Scotland.
I can be as racist to my own people as I like.
And here's an interesting thing that I found out this week.
In the August English dictionary, there's three meanings for the word Albanian.
Okay.
Number one, I bet you can guess.
Cocaine.
From, from, from, from someone from Albania, right?
Number two, someone from Scotland.
Because Scotland used to be called Albert.
And has been called Albania in the 12th century.
You get British people calling Scotland Albania.
So, yeah.
And the third one is someone from Albany, New York.
Is an Albanian as well.
Oh, I know.
I had a twin in some way.
Yeah.
In a confusing way.
Welcome to Albania.
All the way to New York also has one of the weirdest venues in the entire world called
the egg.
Okay.
There's a egg shaped building from the outside, which is on like three stealths.
So you have to get this elevator up to this egg.
It's called the egg.
The egg opening.
I've played it.
It's a lovely venue.
A theatre venue.
Tell us your best jokes.
Great.
Yeah.
I'm pretty sure I'm going to be invited back then.
I'm pretty sure I'm going to be invited back.
I'm going to be invited back.
- I've just realised. - Yeah.
- Well, the earliest ever maps of Scotland, Polly.
The map of Polly, it was made in the second century AD,
and it's pretty good.
- Unbelievable, the goods.
- Except that.
- It's on its side.
- Scotland sticks out to the right instead of going up.
And it's as if it's had the Euregana treatment.
(laughing)
The rest of the mainland goes up.
You know, you've got Polly to see, Cornwall,
you can see Kent, and it tapers up,
and then suddenly it just turns a corner,
and Scotland just sticks out to the east.
- And what happened there?
- An era.
- Oh, yeah.
- Oh, okay.
- She moved on?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, we can do one more thing, actually.
So the Romans, often not very nice about Britain,
but it kind of carries on.
So the first rough guide to Britain,
and the first lonely planet guide to Britain,
they were both published for Australian tourists,
and they were quite insulting to the British, I would say.
- The Australians were.
- Yeah, 'cause it was for students a little bit.
So, but then the British press really kind of went to town.
And so the first rough guide to Britain in 1996
said that the UK had a less than brilliant climate,
a laughable, indigenous cuisine,
and then attitudes to social class
that is ingrained with the habits of feudalism.
- Still.
- It's hard to argue, isn't it?
- It's still old.
- That's typical of someone who was born on the Thames.
That's the, you say that, no, I can't believe that.
(upbeat music)
- Okay, it is time for fact number two,
and that is Andy.
My fact is, the man responsible for harnessing
the power of Niagara Falls also had a pigeon girlfriend.
- Yes.
- Many pigeon girlfriends.
- Well, we'll get into his love life.
- This is Nicala Tesla.
- Yes.
- Incredibly important person in world history, basically.
The man who really, more than almost anyone else,
maybe accepting Edison, harnessed electricity,
created electricity, and just worked out how to distribute
electricity and to transport it across long distances.
Like, harness Niagara Falls, you know,
set up the hydroelectric power station to power.
I think it was a, was it Buffalo in New York State?
It was a New York City, yeah, yeah.
So he was a really, really interesting guy,
born in Serbia, and he was a very eccentric man as well.
And one of the things about him was that he seems
to have lived as a celibate, sort of all his life.
No one knows he ever had a close relationship with anybody.
He once fell in love briefly with a young woman called Anna,
but then they, nothing came of that.
And then later in life, he had a pigeon girlfriend.
(laughing)
- What does that mean, Andy?
- To have a pigeon girlfriend.
- He would feed the birds outside the New York public library.
- As you do to your wife.
(laughing)
- It's up on some bag and the pigeons would approach him flocks.
But there was one special pigeon which came every day.
And he said she was beautiful.
That one was different.
It was a female.
I would know that pigeon anywhere.
She understood me and I understood her.
I loved that pigeon.
I loved her as a man loves a woman and she loves me.
And when she was ill, he knew about it.
She would come to his room and stay with him for days.
And then this is so sad this bit.
He said when that pigeon died, something went out of my life.
And I knew my life's work was finished.
Quite something, I mean he was very eccentric in his later years,
but he had a real attachment to this bird.
- And that was when he lived in our hotel in New York
because Thomas Edison hugely fucked him over.
When he first came over, he was like if you ever come to New York,
I'll have a job for you.
And then next to him, I came over on the boat.
And Edison was like, oh, if you can fix this machine,
I'll give you this amount of money.
So his head said, not only fix the machine,
fix it faster and put vast improvements on it.
And then when he asked Edison for the money,
Edison said, or you clearly just don't get
the American sense of humor.
And that started the rivalry between him and Edison.
The problem was Edison being American
and especially the height of imperialism, capitalism,
would patent everything.
When his Tesla refused to patent any of us to the public doors
because he was a true firm believer
that all energy should be free,
especially if it was harness than that way.
And it took him being screwed over by America
so many times before he finally understood
that something's had to be patent.
But he didn't do enough of it.
And so when he died, he died painless.
And this is one of the few conspiracy theories
I believe in and subscribe to.
- For the listener, Dan was looking
the other Dan straight in the eye down his head.
(laughing)
Like when he died, apparently like the FBI
wherever the back, back in the 1800s version
of the FBI watch went around to his house
and confiscated a bunch of things.
'Cause there are rumors that he was inventing a death rate.
He predicted telephones, wireless telephones
before they were ever invented.
Like almost a century before.
There was a box with a bunch of tubes and wires
which he said just took electricity out of like the ether,
like the air just around.
And it was able to generate this vehicle
for like eight hours in a row.
That thing was confiscated from his hotel
and they've never seen it again.
But it was what it was.
How it created that.
Now obviously it could be rumor all the time.
All this stuff.
Telling you, it's big American government.
(laughing)
- It's the Indian Jones warehouse.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- It's gone into that.
- But I think, you know, I didn't know that side of his story
that he went penniless at the end of his life
and that he was dating pigeons and that he was,
he was a bit odd.
And New York Times, if you go into New York Times
and you put his name in
and you bring it to the years that he was alive,
the headlines come out like a really eccentric.
He almost sounds very sort of like Trump-like
with his like claims.
I got a headline here at July 11th, 1933.
Dr. Tesla at 77, seldom sleeps.
Inventor says his health in mind are better than ever.
Expects to live beyond 140.
Like he was making all the, and the death theme thing was.
- Then he said that he attributed that to drinking
very good whiskey among a few other things.
And when prohibition came in, he said,
"Oh, well now I'm going to get a lift of 130."
- Nice.
(laughing)
- I was brilliant.
I love him.
- The year after, Tesla at 78, bears new death beam.
This is the one you're talking about, Dan.
Invention powerful enough to destroy 10,000 planes,
250 miles away, he says the apparatus
will kill without trace.
- Well, he also thought that that was going to like
be world peace after he answered that, right?
- Yeah, defensive weapon only.
- Yeah, he got a peace ray, I think.
And the idea is like, what's the point of having a war
if Tesla can just press a button or all your planes blowing?
- Yeah, yeah.
- So everyone's going to become friends.
- Yeah, it's a peace ray, guys.
(laughing)
Also, all of this will be anti-Tesla propaganda
because he was there to go,
Edison deeply wanted to discredit him because Tesla's
alternate current was infinitely better than direct current.
It could be because it requires less generators
over distances.
Tesla's electricity was vastly superior
and Edison didn't like that.
So what Edison did to smear Tesla
was got like a full size elephant,
got Tesla's alternate current, ran it through the elephant
and killed it in front of like 10,000 people.
And like, this is how dangerous all of this stuff is.
So then as a rebuttal to that,
I think it was like a couple months later,
that was when Tesla did like a literal festival
of lights and light bulbs throughout New York City
where there's that famous shot of him
like walking through the Tesla coil
when it's touching him
because that was him proving that you can touch electricity
and the Edison's understanding
and picture of what direct current was was a lot.
- Edison comes across as a bit of a hint.
- A piece of, a piece of proof?
- If you don't mind me saying that,
we don't use from I go to this podcast then,
but I think there's...
- Yeah, I mean, I'm almost gonna propose
him as an enemy of the podcast.
- I am with Mark Twain.
- Oh, wow.
- Okay.
- I don't know.
I mean, obviously, he was very important in lots of ways,
but he electrocuted a lot of other animals as well
to prove supposedly that Tesla's stuff was dangerous.
- Really, okay.
- Yeah, he was like the first thing for me,
the first thing was like, what America really is?
Which you can say it's about freedom.
You can say it for an opportunity.
What is, is it somebody getting rich the fastest
and they're doing everything they can to stop anyone else
competing with that?
- Yeah.
- There is a Twain link actually.
And we don't like Mark Twain on this show,
I don't just see you like.
But one thing Tesla designed was an oscillating
electro-therapy machine.
And the idea was it would help people digest
their food from the outside.
So it's a, it's a...
- A pooh-ja-ja.
- From the outside.
- Have you been reading my notes?
That's what.
(all laughing)
- Yeah, pooh-ja-ja.
And Tesla let Mark Twain try this
and sort of strap them into it.
And did not tell him that the need to relieve yourself
comes, comes quite quickly.
- Basically vibrates you, right?
Is that what it was?
- It chuggles you.
- It chuggles you and Twain had to rush off
in some distress to the nearest Lou.
- Can I do a poo Tesla fact then?
- Yes.
- This is modern.
So 40% of Tesla owners,
so people who are on Tesla cars
do it.
- And think that birds deliberately poo on their cars.
- Interesting.
- They did a survey of,
they asked people whether birds deliberately poo on the cars
and they also did a survey of all the cars
and saw how often I'll have frequently birds poo
on all the different cars.
And they found that 40% of Tesla people think
that the birds deliberately poo on there,
but actually they don't feature in the top 10
of brands most pooed on.
- So it is all in their heads.
- Oh, okay.
- Good.
You think that's just like guilt from, you know.
- I think so.
That's why I think it is.
- Buying your tooth brush man, not.
- Mm.
- Did you say you have a Tesla?
- Yes.
- So do you have you ever noticed
an abundance of pigeon shell on your end?
- No.
- But the pigeons.
Is the pigeons on the same back?
- That's what I'm saying.
Is there a marker respect?
Is it sort of the same from my old boy?
- Yeah, exactly.
- For the, yeah, for the only human man
that loved us the way we did it, yeah, yeah.
- He did, the pigeon thing with Tesla,
like he didn't just date them.
He nursed them as well.
He spent a lot of money inventing sort of braces
if they hurt themselves.
So one broke a wing.
He invented a sort of brace to make sure
that the injured bird was okay.
Yeah, big, big old fan.
- Such an interesting man.
- He likes it.
- So the pigeons are just, I don't know if they're wrong.
Like in terms of birds, like they're not seagulls.
If you're looking after seagulls,
I think you should, you should, you should go in jail.
Nobody's, he's rescuing the bastards of the course.
(laughing)
- Pigeons actually ought to get it, but they're not.
- People do get into pigeons though, in quite a way.
So sometimes I walk through St. James's Park,
which is in the middle of London,
and there are a lot of pigeons there,
and it's where people congregate
and put food on their heads or their shoulders
or their knees or their toes.
- Well, so the pigeons land on them, yeah.
- Did they?
- There's people watching Hummel on two too much.
- Yeah, I don't, I don't love it.
And they used to be loads in Trafalgar Square.
They used to be pigeons.
- Hundreds of pigeons flocking around the place.
- Yeah.
- And then I think the mayor, was at Ken Livingston,
introduced Hawks, dealt with the problem.
- Pretty quickly, I'll tell you that.
- But there are a lot of places,
think they're vermin, don't they?
But I just recently was in Capitok here in Turkey,
and they have pigeon lofts everywhere,
'cause they wanted the pigeons to live there,
'cause they would use the poo for fertilizer.
And they also used it to make frescoes in their churches.
- That's cool.
- But yeah, they would deliberately have them there,
but our place is like in Regina, California,
it's illegal to own more than 90 pigeons,
and of your allotted 90 pigeons,
only 50 of them, maybe more than a month old.
- It's very specific.
- Whoa, wow.
- So the rest, you have to, like,
row out to an island and leave them there.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- And then, then, then, then flying.
- Oh, yeah, back.
- Can I give a shit.
- Famously homing bird.
(laughing)
Just, I think these pigeons, into the woods.
- Maybe I have to move to the woods.
- Maybe I'd have to move to the woods.
- But 90 is hard thresholds.
- Yeah, but you can't really call them.
Like, you can use hawks and stuff,
but in Basel, in Switzerland,
they have 20,000 pigeons.
And then, from 1961 to 1985,
they killed around 100,000 every year,
but the population stayed stable, 'cause when you kill them,
they just reproduce and get more and more
until they get to the nice level,
which is the amount that they have enough food for.
- There you go.
- And when he was a child, he once fell head first
into a vat of boiling milk.
And it fell a lot.
- Yeah, he was like really clumsy, you would say.
- So was he like a genius,
but if you watched his life, it was like Mr. Bean.
- Yeah, I think so, right.
- Yeah, he was quite despraxic, I guess.
- I went to his childhood home.
- Did you?
- Really?
- Yeah, yeah, so I get to perform in Croatia and Serbia,
and there's a big argument between Croatia and Serbia
about ways from, because obviously,
that was back in, I think it was Yugoslavia back then.
So there's a debate about whether he's Serbia
or whether he's Croatian.
One of them is named an airport after him.
He's on another one as the other one.
He's got a currency and stuff.
- Right.
- So we went to his childhood home,
which they need to, when I say they need to do it up,
I'm not sure if you're just doing the house up,
but like, there's like this really small tiny town,
nothing near it, and they'll take you around,
but like, he fell off it, he was struck by lightning,
allegedly, he fell off that roof.
- Wow.
- Came out there, it was in a coma for a couple of days.
- Right.
- So he had a lot like visions and stuff,
a lot of his creations, he would say,
came from visions he was having in his head,
and then he would invent this thing,
which is where the conspiracy theories come in,
of like, you know, when he was nine years old,
he said he was going to invent this thing,
and then 30 years later, he died,
and he was all from the visions.
So when he was 30, and he was having these visions,
for things he was going to create 30 years,
people are like, well, he was obviously going to do that.
Just like the original, except,
and the reason I love him is,
I think there is something deeply,
deeply fucking honorable for like this man,
who did not want to patent anything.
He was like, all of this stuff deserves to be free.
This would benefit society.
There's no benefit to charging people from this.
And the fact that the first place that that idea was kicked
out of him was he arrived in the shores of America.
Anyway, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, absolutely, here, let us introduce you to capitalism, to the eighth degree.
You're going to die alone in the richest city in the world.
You will have a girlfriend.
Yeah, I'm just going to have a lovely bit of breath.
Okay, it is time for fact number three, and that is my fact.
My fact this week is that the first Swedish translation
of "Lord of the Rings" inspired two follow-up works.
The first, by Tolkien, was on how not to translate his books.
And the second was by the Swedish translator
on how Tolkien was actually a dark wizard Nazi.
Oh my God.
Jeez.
Yeah, it was a--
You can go on then.
It was really bad.
So this was a translation that was done by Orca Olmarks.
He was a Swedish translator.
Did really big books in his time.
So he was a very respected translator,
took on the job of doing "Lord of the Rings,"
and it came out, and it was just panned.
Locally, it was panned.
People thought that the translation just
added descriptions that shouldn't have been there,
the way he phrased certain sentences just in run nicely.
When you read them in isolation,
they don't seem like big changes.
But apparently, when they're all smashed together
and these gigantic books, it really becomes obvious.
And so Tolkien took issue with it to the point of writing
a guide called "Guide to the Names in the Lord of the Rings,"
and actively used examples from the Swedish translation
to show what you shouldn't do.
Well, it's interesting, because Tolkien was a philology
world master.
He was a linguist.
He just studied language deeply for 50, 60 years
before writing these books.
So of course, he's going to have--
But you think he wouldn't have spoken Swedish.
I think so, no.
But he knew when the names had been changed.
That was one big bugbear.
He wrote, "In principle, I object
as strongly as is possible to the translation
of the nomenclature at all, brackets
even by a competent person."
But then if you're translating, you don't necessarily
need to change the names, do you?
That's what got him so angry.
Right.
But what if someone has a really silly sounding name?
They might have a grand name in English,
and they've got a silly sounding name here.
And actually, I didn't know this.
And I did read all the books as a teenager,
and I loved them.
They're supposedly a translation, like the whole Lord
of the Rings. He has to explain why it's in English.
Were they in, like, Hobbit language, as well?
Yes, it's the story the Hobbit's told.
There's something called the Red Book of West March,
which was written by the Hobbits.
And it's kind of-- I love a framing device
where someone says, I've just translated this from the original,
which is all in the Hobbit.
That's why we have words in here, like sausage or whatever.
Yeah, it's clever.
It's really interesting.
He was a clever guy.
He was a clever guy, but I think he was clever.
Well, all Marx doesn't think so.
Oh, sorry.
I wrote a book called Tolkien and Black Magic.
It didn't get a big distribution,
so you have to go into certain libraries
in order to get it out, and it was never translated into English.
But the blurb reads roughly, it comes to the attention,
especially during the last few years,
the multitude of Tolkien societies
have denigrated to a kind of Ku Klux Klan
with a worship of open violence, crude orgies, alcohol,
and drug abuse.
Crude orgies.
Oh, that's the worst kind of orgies.
Oh, well, yeah.
The pinkie's up, boys.
Well, cover the next class, near the ass.
So I found someone who's got a Tumblr account
called Upon the Formos Ship, who went to read the book.
And this is the only thing really that I can find out
about the details.
They say that the first chapter of the book
is quite frankly unreadable.
All he does is list a bunch of evil or cultish organizations
and claim that the Tolkien fans and Tolkien are like that.
The next chapter is called The Half-Witted Old Man Tolkien.
Never refers to him just as Tolkien.
He always calls him Old Man Tolkien.
And then he starts having a crack at the book itself.
So in the later chapter, he starts saying
that the hobbits are forever children with no adult supervision
that walk around barefoot in the woods.
And he says, "Billbo specifically has this never-ending birthday
party, so crap."
And he's like--
It's such a violent way to not be able to take Chris.
I know, right?
Yeah.
But I think all Marx, the translator, was so annoyed
because I'm not to excuse it.
But he obviously, for years and years,
people were telling him over and over
and over what a bad job he'd done, which I think he probably had.
And then at one point, some years later,
a fire happened at his house.
And he blamed the Tolkien fans.
He said that it was arson by--
Very early.
He really became--
I mean, and it's possible that he got a lot of flack
to make him paranoid to think that.
But he even put conspiracy theories into the book itself.
So as you go further along, he says,
oh, it's all very obviously Tolkien for the first bit,
but then the kind of style changes.
And he thinks C.S. Lewis wrote the rest of the book.
Oh, well, the Lord of the Rings.
Yeah, yeah.
He thinks he only gets to a certain point than--
They were amazed.
And they were part of--
They were in--
Yeah, the spread eagle in Oxford.
They would sit and read these things out at the pub.
That's a wild book.
Are you a fan, Daniel?
I'm a massive fan of fantasy.
Yeah.
But-- and the reason I am is from the Lord of the Rings movies.
They came out when I was like 11 years old.
They blew my mind.
And then I tried reading them when I was 14 and 15,
which at the time they were so different from the movies
that they annoyed me.
And it's something I'm going to revisit now.
But now that I have a four-year-old son,
where I'm just like, we're getting close to being
allowed to show him--
I know they say 12.
He's seeing it when he's there.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, yeah, no.
My three-year-old did all of the Avenger movies.
Like, it's fine.
Well, my question with that is, it's not about--
I don't care about the content.
But the first time he watches the Lord of the Rings,
I need him to have the attention span for it
to be two and a half hours.
And for him to understand that it is the greatest movie
series ever made.
Yeah, yeah.
Oh, you'll be showing him the abridged versions, then.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'll be doing the three-year-old boring stuff,
being like, I think--
Did you know that Diego Mournson broke his foot
while kicking the helmet of the Uruguay in the two-towers?
And that screamer's genuine.
That's a real fact.
The movie, the "Every Lord of the Rings" fan knows, yeah.
That's very good.
I didn't know that.
Yeah, yeah.
It's such a mean fact now that it's the most cut.
If you watch-- if you watch that movie with anyone,
he genuinely breaks his foot when the scream is real.
Because I remember him kicking a helmet.
I don't remember the scream.
Was it him as well who had to climb all the mountains
to do the shoots because he was afraid of flying?
Sean Beam.
No, wait, no.
He used to get refused to climb up to the top of the mountains
in fellowship with the ring.
So they've got lots of footage of Josh John Beam, by himself,
climbing up a mountain in full Borlomir and Keir through the snow.
And they're like, well, this is actually rules.
Wait, he climbed up because he was afraid of flying?
Yes.
But climbing is--
Where's his home risks?
Yes, but it's more the helicopters.
So he's in the helicopter.
I was going to say, how did he get to New Zealand?
[LAUGHTER]
But if you get your cloak in the rotor blades,
I completely understand the pulse.
Also, when the hobbits were like, why don't we just
get the eagles to fly us to Mordor?
It was actually boring me.
I'd be like, no, no, no, no.
I think we should walk there.
I think the eagles are just a stupid idea.
That's so funny.
And also, it's any non-node nerds.
People would say, why didn't they fly the ring to Mordor?
What were the last words that Gandalf the Grey said before he died?
Oh, he says fly, doesn't he?
Before he goes down into the thing about our own.
He says fly?
It was a secret plan that he had that he was taking them through
to get the two of the eagles.
You couldn't tell anyone, because Sarah Mann is everywhere.
That's where everyone is.
We just watched the rest of it, please.
I'm going to be there to see you absolutely ruined.
Please film for your boy.
God, I'm my dad with Star Wars.
You could have cheered up your son by getting him a little present,
because in 2021, some developers attempted
to launch the J.R.R. token, a cryptocurrency based, not based on.
Namely punned after Tolkien, but it was blocked by the estate.
Despite the fact they got the actor who played Pippin in the movies
to make a video endorsing.
What about the refuse firm from Brighton called Lord of the Bins
who were told to change their name?
They do get, obviously, they're protective,
because people will take the Mickey otherwise.
Yeah, there was also like this year there was a company
who was like a burger van thing called Lord of the Fries.
And Tolkien's estate took them to court,
even though it's obviously based on Lord of the Fries.
But they said that they might be trying
to pass it off as a Lord of the Rings,
because people are more familiar with Lord of the Rings
than they are with Lord of the Fries.
They lost.
Has my goal?
So it is, 'cause Golding, I don't know when he died,
but I think he will still definitely be in copyright.
Yeah, no, they're, well, they're not bothered.
Okay, they're bothered with the Fries people.
There's another, not like a translation,
but a different version of Lord of the Rings
by a Russian guy called Kirill Yeskov.
And it's called--
'Cosaraman's the Goodie, yes.
Absolutely right.
Is it?
Yeah.
It's called Pasledni Cassienasets,
which means the last ring bearer.
And it's about that basically Mordor
is a rational, progressive industrial society.
And they're being crushed by the elites of the West
who come over and take over.
Oh, my God.
Oh, no.
And it's actually like in Russia,
you can get it for sure.
And in other parts of Europe, you can.
But they've never made it in an English-speaking country
because they didn't look going to get sued.
Well, from what I've read, they've never released it.
There's been a translation done, and if you dig online,
you find it.
Digi, right?
Yeah, yeah.
But yeah, it's never been commercially released.
Apparently, it's really like it's a good parody.
It's apparently it's a pretty good book.
Right.
A pretty good fantasy alternative reality.
Interesting kind of thing.
Wow, nice.
Do you know why Tolkien came up with the Hobbit in the first place?
The whole book.
Yeah.
It's through boredom.
So he was a teacher at the time, and he was not well off.
He and his wife didn't have much money at all.
And he took on the job of marking school exam papers.
You could do that if you were a teacher at the time.
You'd just say, right, I'll sign up for a batch and you got paid per paper that you marked.
The boredom prompted him to write the sentence just on a scrapbook of paper in a hole in the
ground that I lived a Hobbit.
And he later said, I did not.
I did and do not know why.
Just sort of...
Oh.
And he had obviously studied languages a huge deal in Hobbit because Hobbit is an old word
and, you know, all the names are sort of ancient words.
And he'd read a lot of myth from his early childhood.
He had a really tragic early childhood.
But it just sort of happened right there.
I do like the idea that he writes, "Hole in the Ground" was a Hobbit, and the recipe just writes itself.
Yeah, exactly.
He had a big problem, I think, because a lot of the way he wrote it was trying to make certain
things sound archaic and ancient.
Right.
But in some European languages, that's just the way sentences work.
Yeah, yeah.
Like the German...
I see.
...and the German sentences are the other way up.
And he's better just waiting for the main verb.
And so, if Tolkien has written, why is it other ways of the Blas?
Does that mean that Yoda doesn't work in German?
Yoda is probably...
Yoda is the only normal talking guy in this film.
German, everyone else.
German's love him.
Like, he gets straight to the point.
And now he's feeling without that news.
Easy to comprehend, Yoda is.
That's very funny.
Justin.
Yeah, it's weird with all the litigations that go on.
And we had Ella Alshamahi on this show.
She's an anthropologist, paleoanthropologist.
And there was a...
The hominid that was found, that it was very short.
And so they were known as the Hobbits and the Estate got in touch.
Saying, "You can't call them Hobbits, even as part of you."
Yeah, it's very wild.
That is the length that they go.
Which is surprising, then, that for the last 50 years or so,
still in print is the book "Bord of the Rings",
which was the Harvard Lampoon book.
So the creators of "National Lampoon" started in Harvard.
And they wrote this book, which was an outright...
Yeah, I think I read it when I was...
Yeah, or I read bits of it when I was younger.
So you've got Bilbo and Frodo,
where Dildo Bugend and Frito Buggo got damn for Gollum.
And they've never been out of print.
It's all millions globally.
It's been trans-American laws or parody laws.
You know, sometimes you'll protect it if it gets...
Yeah, 'cause you're so clearly a part of it, man.
Yeah.
I guess so, yeah.
Interesting.
We mentioned CS Lewis earlier.
Oh, yeah.
The line that was in the wardrobe is dedicated to someone called Lucy.
He was the daughter of his friends.
And he sent the copy to her mother and father,
oh, in a mod bar field.
And mod was so worried that people would read it
and then kids would go into wardrobes and get stuck.
That is such...
She made him change it.
So if you read it,
whenever the kids go into the wardrobe,
they're always really careful to leave it a job
or when they come back out ago.
Oh, that's so...
So he changed it within it, too.
I really like the fact that something in CS Lewis's life
was like, you need to change the story
so that kids don't lock themselves in cupboards
where everyone at JK Rowling's life was like,
yeah, and then they just run into a fucking wall
at a train station.
Ah, just keep that in.
Don't just keep that in, put that in, every book.
And make it like a really big part.
It's for a nine-year-old.
Just for a nine-year-old.
Make sure Stephen Fryke does it in order
to book and describe that happening every time.
Okay, it's time for a final fact of the show,
and that is James.
Okay, my fact this week is that in the 1950s,
the Alabama Drafts Champion proposed to the twin sister
of the World Drafts Champion
with the aim of creating a family of drafts geniuses.
Yeah, I'm so declined.
So I've been reading about this guy called Marion Tinsley,
and I think he is better than anyone else in the world
at one thing, which is drafts.
More than anyone in history has been better
than anything else in the world.
Oh, wow, that's a big flame, wow.
I reckon, I think you might be right.
I think I can do you.
This is going to sound like a stretch.
We know you've got comedy, Dan.
This is not.
We just think the person who's second best is not far from you.
Tiger Woods.
Oh, yeah.
Tiger Woods, my favourite star about Tiger Woods,
and so the way golf works is there's budget tournaments.
There's four majors where the big ones,
there's four of them a year in a 10-year period.
If you were to total up Tiger's score
in all four of these majors every year,
four tournaments over 10 years, his score was 112 under par.
So 112 shots under par.
In second place was Phil Mickelson over those same 10 years
with the score of plus 121.
Yeah.
That was second place.
So like that's Phil Mickelson was like the greatest player
of his generation.
Unfortunately, he played at a time when the greatest ever
to interest me.
100% I agree that Tiger Woods was by far the best goal
for his era.
But this guy from 1948, when he took up checkers or drafts
until he died in 1994, he only lost nine games.
And two of them were against a computer.
And by the way, when he played the computer,
who could calculate three million positions per minute
and looked 21 moves ahead and had been loaded with every game
he had ever played, he played the computer 49 times
and he beat it 4-2 with all the rest were ties.
This guy is just amazing.
He's so great.
And do you know of those of those defeats,
where you said the nine games?
So two of those were to the computer.
Two of them were trivial errors.
He just-- oh, you know, we call it a fat finger error.
You know, there's one time between 1950 and 1992
that he was outplayed.
Right.
He's probably a bit poorly at the time or something.
It's just, it's unbelievable.
Do you know what drove him to do all this?
What the fire was inside of the picture?
You loved the picture?
You loved a picture.
His parents could only afford a chess board
but not the chess piece.
So we've got all the pontifract cakes but we've gone off.
So we're not going to read them.
But half of them have gone off and turned.
The origin story all comes back to him
being absolutely furious and pissed off
with an old lady called Mrs. Kurshal.
Who beat him in the game and beat him game after game.
He still talked about it in interviews afterwards.
Oh, how she'd cackle.
He would like be seething about it.
And he went into a local library in America
and he found all the books and he learnt all the things
and studied the hell out of it.
And that was it.
That was the moment for him.
He was called to Masculiney, baby.
Yeah.
And he used to do blindfold checkers.
So you've probably had blindfold chess,
like Magnus Carlson's play chess blindfolded amazingly well.
As can they all really blindfold checkers is way harder.
Because like you're only using half the book
because you only use the white squares, right?
And there's fewer pieces but they're all identical.
And so you can't say what the horse is here
and the castles over here and the queens over here.
They're just blobs on a board.
And to remember where everything is,
it's just absolutely incredible.
That is incredible.
There was a guy who was one of the greatest at the time,
some say the second best while he was still playing
called Derek Oldbury.
And he says, this guy, Tinsley, was to checkers,
what Leonardo da Vinci was to science,
what Michelangelo was to art,
and what Beethoven was to music,
and what Daniel Suss is to comedy.
I'm sorry, I'm the foreshadowing.
No, it's crazy.
He was such an interesting man.
He retired for 12 years because there was no competition at one point
and they kept having wild championships,
but they sort of said, well, obviously Barian is the best.
Yeah, you're sort of playing to be...
Not, yeah, this is what can be.
Well, it's effectively.
It's what David Letterman said about Robin Williams
when he suddenly went into movies and stopped doing stand-up.
He was like, we all collectively as stand-ups
just went, well, let's just pretend that didn't happen.
Because he was so good, he was such a whirlwind.
It was like, that's just changed the game.
But in 51 years of play, he won about $100,000 in prize money
in total.
Yeah, not that much money.
It's not big, is it?
It's not. Where, isn't it?
I was just thought that it would have been a multibillionaire, yeah.
This thing with the computer,
where he later on was playing against a computer called Chinook.
It was developed by a young computer program
called Jonathan Schaffer,
who was fascinated by two things, drafts and computers.
You know, when Tinsley played against Chinook, he loved it.
He said it made him feel like a young man again.
Yeah.
Because he just, he could play so well
that playing against a human was so...
Born in trivia.
Yeah, he first played Chinook, the 1992.
They had a set in '92 and then another set in '94.
And then very sadly, he realized he was terribly ill
through the '94 games and he died not long after that.
But in 1992, when they first played Man Against Machine,
it made some clever little move.
And he said, "You're going to regret that."
And to see that, to see that that was an error on the board,
a human would have had to look as Tinsley did.
64 moves ahead.
Wow.
And the thing about checkers and drafts is quite simple.
If you look one move ahead and your opponent looks two moves ahead,
they'll beat you.
But then if you look three moves ahead, you'll beat them.
Because it's quite a simple game.
It's all about looking what happens next, what happens next, what happens next.
So if he can look 64 moves ahead, you'd have to be able to look 65 to beat him.
Right.
And when he beat this computer, people said,
"How an earth did you beat the computer?"
And he said, "Well, humans programmed the computer and God programmed me."
Yeah.
Just quite religious.
He was very religious, wasn't he?
And he was a...
Did he...
Yeah, that check.
So if you're getting that, if you're getting that good at checkers,
you're not getting laid.
You're not getting laid.
You know what?
He said to a newspaper apart, they read. He said, "I haven't seen a checker's marriage that worked out.
It's a very rare woman who can be married to a real student of checkers."
Well, that's being polite, at least.
It's saying the problem is probably more with me than I think, which is fair.
I do love that someone who's thought of themselves as so good that humans were not part of the scene anymore for them.
It's so funny.
He's like, "I'm going to have to start banging pigeons."
I'm sure one believably good in chair. My favorite fact about him is that he died in a town called Humble.
No, no.
In Texas.
Well, he was in a way.
He said there's a sort of Christian concept called the Fellowship of Suffering.
And he said, "I hope the Tolkien estate in here not that."
He said there was a sort of checkers fellowship of suffering.
You know, it's grinding to go through it.
And also, he said he couldn't have much of an ego because every time he said I play drafts to an adult, they would say,
"Oh, my little boy plays drafts. You should give him a game. That'll be nice."
So he said, "Well, I think I'll win."
Yeah, it's been really good at FIFA.
Yeah?
I'm sure the greatest people in the world is 37 years old.
And that's sad.
Master players, of which we've established, there are a few, but one amazing sort of Don Champion.
They develop these things called "cooks," which removes which throw your opponent off, apparently.
And they've all got names.
I love this because you don't start.
You know chess, you start with an opening.
An opening.
The Queen's gambit.
Precisely gambit.
In checkers, I think you don't do that.
What did you say they were called?
These are called "cooks," which people put.
I didn't see you see K.
No, like "cooks," like a person who cooks food.
Oh, a cook.
Like a cook.
Yeah.
Because I'd say "cuck," for what you're supposed to be.
I'm sorry.
Am I hearing they're the same, like "cuck" and "cuck" are the same word.
Um, ready to study "cuck"?
But basically, you don't start in this starting position when you play competitive checkers.
You draw a three move opening from a stack of approved openings, and that gives one
player a tiny advantage, and then if you make a mistake, your opponent compounds.
Because this thing that Jonathan Schaefer, the computer guy, worked out in 2007, he solved
checkers.
Yeah.
Do you want to hear that there was a mystical story about what happened to him?
So, sorry.
Did he work out that whoever goes first wins?
He worked out that if both players are perfect, they draw.
Okay.
Great.
But if you have these approved openings, then one player has a tiny advantage.
Um, so he'd been working on this for many years, running hundreds of computers around the
world, playing through all the permutations to work out, which is basically to finish checkers.
And in 2007, they knew the end was pretty near, and they were getting closer and closer
to having completed the calculations for it.
And there'd been some kind of power outage, and he was furious, because if that's happened,
you need to restart them all, you need to do everything, like it's just really a laborious
process, he said.
And he opened the screen, and he saw the word tada.
And it's what he'd programmed in way ago, years ago, when he'd started working on these calculations,
and that was the sign that you finished it, you've worked it out.
It's just so nice that he programmed it in.
Yeah.
And it turns out it was a draw.
It's all your recap moment that he programmed it himself.
I know.
And he'd forgotten that he'd forgotten he'd done it.
Wow.
He put it down.
Yeah.
Checkers, as I know, it's a hugely popular game over in the States, particularly.
Yeah, there's lists that you can read, like the most popular board games that you can get,
and it usually comes in second, at least according to fun.com.
After...
Maustrep.
Yeah, what do you think it's after?
What thing?
Board game for Americans?
Yeah.
Little bit for board game.
Shoots and ladders.
Oh, maybe second and mouth.
Yeah, I would say monopoly.
It comes in, according to fun.com, it comes in third underneath checkers.
The top is chess.
Right.
And they say that over 50 billion units have been sold of checkers games going, because it's
a very ancient game.
It's thousands of people.
Really?
50 billion.
That's a big number.
That's everyone alive on the planet today owning eight sets.
Yeah.
We've all got eight sets.
I don't know.
I'm not sure how many humans have been alive, because population is...
Well, I think that's one for every person who's ever lived.
Yeah, but that makes it.
I've definitely owned more than...
That's it.
You've got to remember it back in the days before we had phones.
You know, when you went to the airport, you would get like a magnetic checkers set there.
Every pub would have one.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's like, you know...
That's one pub.
Right?
That I reckon I've had at least three or four as a kid.
Yeah.
In my childhood, I would even say, like given Christmas presents, birthday presents,
before Xbox and stuff, I'd probably owned up to ten.
Come on.
This is, we would be waiting for a little checkers set.
We would notice there would be a commission to deal with the problem.
That's crazy.
Well, 50 billion.
Just numbers.
Oh, I gotta be.
Take it up with TheBuffinsAtFund.com, because this is a solid number.
Okay, that's it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over
the course of this podcast, we're all online.
I'm on @Streiberland on Instagram, James.
My Instagram is nosy things James Harkin.
Andy.
Andrew HunterM.
Dan, where are you?
I'm on Instagram.
I'm telling you so.
I'm sure we've got all this stuff.
Just my name.
Yeah.
Just whatever platform.
Supposed naming.
Yeah.
And if you want to go see Andy and Dan play live at Wembley, this November.
Yes.
28.
Yeah, give us the details.
28th November.
Welcome to Wembley, Ovo Arena, obviously Becky's gig of my life.
Well, you can also get to us as a group on podcast at qi.com, so send us any emails there.
If you send us some facts, that's going to make its way to our Monday show, little fish.
If you send any thoughts about new ideas that we should be incorporating into our shows,
and you just general bits of feedback, and he's going to bring that to drop us a line.
You can find drop us a line as part of Club Fish.
So go to patreon.com/nosuchthing as a fish.
We'll find all the different tiers that you can get involved with there.
We'll just come back next week, because we'll be back again here with another episode.
We'll see you then.
Goodbye.
[MUSIC]